Overview
========

.. currentmodule:: xpcsjax


xpcsjax is a JAX-native, NLSQ-only fitter for X-ray Photon Correlation
Spectroscopy (XPCS) two-time correlation data. Version 0.1 unifies the
homodyne and heterodyne non-linear least-squares pipelines previously
distributed across the upstream ``homodyne`` and ``heterodyne`` packages
into a single, lazily-loaded Python module.

Design intent
-------------

xpcsjax exists to solve one problem well: given a YAML configuration
and an HDF5 dataset, return calibrated XPCS model parameters as fast as
the trust-region solver allows on CPU. Everything outside that path is
intentionally absent.

.. note::

   xpcsjax is **NLSQ-only by design**. Posterior sampling and any other
   probabilistic-programming workflow are out of scope for the
   lifetime of v0.1+. Users requiring those workflows should continue
   to use the upstream ``homodyne`` or ``heterodyne`` packages
   directly.

The two-function API
--------------------

The public surface of xpcsjax is deliberately small. Almost every
analysis is a composition of two calls:

.. code-block:: python

   import xpcsjax

   data = xpcsjax.load_xpcs_data("config.yaml")
   result = xpcsjax.fit_nlsq(data, "config.yaml")

   print(result.parameters)
   print(result.reduced_chi_squared)

:func:`xpcsjax.data.xpcs_loader.load_xpcs_data` returns a plain ``dict`` with five keys:
``wavevector_q_list``, ``phi_angles_list``, ``t1``, ``t2``, ``c2_exp``.
The full layout is documented in :doc:`/user_guide/data_loading`.

:func:`xpcsjax.optimization.nlsq.fit_nlsq` consumes that ``dict`` plus a configuration
reference (a path, a :class:`xpcsjax.config.ConfigManager` instance, or a
loaded ``dict``) and returns either:

* an :class:`xpcsjax.optimization.nlsq.results.OptimizationResult` for the homodyne analysis
  modes, or
* a ``list[NLSQResult]`` (one entry per phi-angle stratum) for the
  heterodyne / two-component analysis modes.

Both objects expose the same fitted parameters, uncertainties,
covariance, reduced :math:`\chi^2`, and a diagnostics trail. See
:doc:`/user_guide/interpreting_results` for the field-by-field
walk-through.

Lazy loading
------------

Importing ``xpcsjax`` is cheap. The top-level ``__init__.py`` performs
only three actions:

1. Sets ``JAX_ENABLE_X64=1``, ``NLSQ_SKIP_GPU_CHECK=1``, and an
   ``XLA_FLAGS`` string that disables ``constant_folding`` and forces
   four host platform devices.
2. Silences a handful of JAX backend loggers.
3. Registers six names in an internal ``_LAZY_EXPORTS`` dictionary.

The six public names — ``load_xpcs_data``, ``fit_nlsq``,
``ConfigManager``, ``HomodyneModel``, ``HeterodyneModel``, and
``OptimizationResult`` — are resolved on first attribute access through
a module-level ``__getattr__``. This means:

.. code-block:: python

   import xpcsjax           # no JAX import yet
   xpcsjax.fit_nlsq         # JAX, NLSQ, and dependents load here

Tooling that walks the public API (Sphinx autosummary, type checkers,
IDE auto-complete) sees the literal ``__all__`` list and can therefore
discover the symbols statically, but no heavy dependency is paid for
until a symbol is actually used.

.. warning::

   The JAX environment variables must be set *before* the first JAX
   import. Do not move the environment setup into a submodule, and do
   not import ``jax`` (directly or indirectly) before importing
   ``xpcsjax`` in a script.

Position in the XPCS landscape
------------------------------

xpcsjax did not start as a research tool. It started as a port. The
upstream packages it derives from are:

``homodyne``
    Reference implementation of homodyne XPCS NLSQ fitting in static
    and laminar-flow geometries. Used as both a port source and a
    parity oracle.

``heterodyne``
    Reference implementation of the two-component heterodyne model
    with up to fourteen physics parameters plus per-angle scaling.

The repository includes a characterization test suite
(``tests/characterization/test_homodyne_equivalence.py``) that compares
xpcsjax output to baselines generated by the upstream homodyne package.
The contract is bit-comparable parameter recovery, not approximate
agreement. Any change in xpcsjax that breaks parity is a regression by
definition.

Capability boundary
-------------------

The following are in scope for v0.1:

* Homodyne fitting in ``static``, ``static_isotropic``,
  ``static_anisotropic``, and ``laminar_flow`` modes.
* Heterodyne / two-component fitting (``two_component``,
  ``heterodyne``) including the multi-angle Fourier reparameterisation.
* CPU-only execution. The NLSQ GPU check is suppressed at import time.
* Strategy routing across in-memory, stratified-least-squares,
  hybrid-streaming, and out-of-core paths based on dataset size and
  available RAM.

The following are explicitly out of scope for v0.1:

* GPU acceleration. Planned for v0.2+.
* Any form of probabilistic inference, posterior sampling, variational
  approximation, or Monte Carlo workflow.
* Multi-dataset joint fitting beyond per-angle stratification within a
  single dataset.

What to read next
-----------------

* :doc:`/user_guide/data_loading` — HDF5 layout, returned dict, phi-angle
  filtering.
* :doc:`/user_guide/configuration` — YAML schema and
  :class:`xpcsjax.config.ConfigManager`.
* :doc:`/user_guide/analysis_modes` — parameter counts and physical
  meaning of each mode.
* :doc:`/user_guide/homodyne_workflow` and
  :doc:`/user_guide/heterodyne_workflow` — end-to-end scripts.
* :doc:`/user_guide/nlsq_fitting` — strategy selection, bounds,
  transforms, anti-degeneracy controller.
* :doc:`/user_guide/interpreting_results` —
  :class:`xpcsjax.optimization.nlsq.results.OptimizationResult` field reference.
* :doc:`/user_guide/troubleshooting` — common error paths.
